Term: 1-1-2-1 press defense

--- Concise Definition ---
1-1-2-1 press defense : Basketball strategy that emphasizes defensive pressure as well as traps near the corners, ultimately to create turnovers or at minimum, to disrupt offensive scoring opportunities near the basket or near perimeter areas of the court.

--- Detailed Explanation ---
Table of Contents

- What is the 1-1-2-1 press defense in basketball?

- What is an example of the initial formation for the 1-1-2-1 press defense?

- What is the general meaning of the numbering style for the 1-1-2-1 press?

- What are the primary actions of defenders within the 1-1-2-1 press?

- What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense when the ball is initially in the backcourt?

- What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense that illustrates the first potential trap?

- What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense when the ball gets passed out of the first trap?

- What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense that demonstrates the second potential trap?

- What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense when ball reversal happens in the backcourt?

What is the 1-1-2-1 press defense in basketball?

The 1-1-2-1 press defense in basketball is a strategy that emphasizesdefensive pressureas well astrapsnear the corners, ultimately to createturnoversor at minimum, to disrupt offensive scoring opportunities near the basket or nearperimeterareas of the court.

How to understand the player roles and diagrams on this page

In reference to any 1-1-2-1 press diagrams below, each defensive player is indicated by the letter X shown alongside a number such as 1.

For the purposes of this web page, this letter X and the adjacent number symbolizes one of the standardbasketball positions.

This also applies to offensive players but without the letter X. Instead, offensive players will simply be referred to as their respective number.

In essence, the defensive and offensivepoint guardsare denoted as X1 and 1, respectively.

The defensive and offensiveshooting guardsare indicated as X2 and 2, respectively.

The defensive and offensivesmall forwardsare represented as X3 and 3, respectively.

The defensive and offensivepower forwardsare signified as X4 and 4, respectively.

Lastly, the defensive and offensivecentersare denoted as X5 and 5, respectively.

Moreover, in terms of a brief legend for the diagrams:

- Black Dot or Small Circle:The black dot or small circle represents the basketball.

- Solid Arrow:The solid arrow indicates movement or a cut on the basketball court.

- Dotted Arrow:The dotted arrow represents a basketball pass.

- Wavy Arrow:The wavy arrow indicates dribbling.

What is an example of the initial formation for the 1-1-2-1 press defense?

[Image Alt Text: The initial formation of the 1-1-2-1 press with only defensive players and no offensive players on the court.]

[Image Alt Text: The initial formation of the 1-1-2-1 press with only defensive players and no offensive players on the court.]

X1 starts in the offensive team’sbackcourtwithin the lane between the basket and the free throw line.

X2 also begins in the offensive team’s backcourt as well, but at the top of the three-point arc.

X3 and X4 start in the offensive team’sfrontcourtnear the half court line and sidelines.

In addition, X5 begins in the frontcourt but near thehigh post, also known as thenailarea.

What is the general meaning of the numbering style for the 1-1-2-1 press?

Essentially, it is called 1-1-2-1 because each digit represents the general alignment for the defensive players on the court.

To provide more clarity of this concept, the digits between dashes represent the number of defensive players that will be located in a certain region of the court, usually from the front, the middle, or the back.

Also, more dashes in a numbering format generally means more regions for the players to occupy on the court.

Basically, one dash would generally represent two regions of the court that players would fill. Furthermore, two dashes would typically signify three regions for players to occupy on the court.

In a similar fashion, three dashes would usually be indicative of four regions that players would fill on the court.

An example of that would be this particular press itself. In other words, for this 1-1-2-1 press defense, the players will align in four regions on the court from the front to the back.

The diagram below gives a demonstration of this concept.

[Image Alt Text: An example of the 1-1-2-1 press during the initial formation that contains one or more defensive players within different regions on the court]

[Image Alt Text: An example of the 1-1-2-1 press during the initial formation that contains one or more defensive players within different regions on the court]

In essence, the first region contains one player, who is X1 for this example. The second region contains another player, who is X2 for this example.

The third region contains two players, who are X3 and X4 for this example. Finally the fourth contains yet another player, who is X5 for this example.

What are the primary actions of defenders within the 1-1-2-1 press?

Generally speaking, the primary actions of defenders within the 1-1-2-1 press are to put pressure on the offensive player in possession of the ball, protect the middle area of the court, particularly while the ball is still in the backcourt, set traps near the corners, and protect the basket.

Pressure offensive player in possession of ball towards sideline

A defender in the first region of the press should apply a certain amount of pressure that influences the offensive player in possession of the basketball to dribble it towards the sideline.

Also, in some instances, a defender in the second region of the press could implement pressure to nudge an offensive player in possession of the ball towards a sideline.

The defender within the second region will typically apply pressure when an offensive player in possession of the ballreversesit via a backcourt backwards pass or by way of a backcourtskip pass.

Protect the middle area of the court

A defender should always be available to protect the middle area of the court, particularly when an offensive player is being pressured towards a sideline or when an offensive player is being trapped in a corner.

Generally speaking, players within the first, second, and third region will protect the middle of the court depending on the location of the ball as well as the defensive actions of other team members.

Set traps near corners

Two defenders should typically trap the basketball when it is in the frontcourt corner near the half court line.

Additionally, it should be noted that this particular area could be referred to as acoffin corneras well.

Essentially, once an offensive player gets trapped in that area of the court, it would be difficult for them to release the defensive pressure, mainly via action such as ball reversal or anescape dribble.

Furthermore, defensive players could also set traps when an offensive player has possession of the ball in the frontcourt corner near thebaselineand adjacent sideline.

Generally speaking, defenders of all regions could have an opportunity to set a trap with a teammate.

Protect the basket

A defender should drop back into the lane area to protect the basket, generally when an offensive player has control of the ball in the frontcourt or when an offensive player with or without possession of the ball moves below the free throw line extended area.

The defender within the fourth region will usually be the initial basket protector. However, defenders within the third region could also drop back to protect the basket in certain instances.

What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense when the ball is initially in the backcourt?

This is an example of initial 1-1-2-1 defensive pressure that could happen while the offensive team has possession of the ball within their backcourt.

[Image Alt Text: An example of initial pressure within the backcourt area of the 1-1-2-1 press defense.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of initial pressure within the backcourt area of the 1-1-2-1 press defense.]

At the beginning, 1 receives the ball via an inbound pass from 4.

As that happens, X1 immediately applies defensive pressure and executes a proper defensive slide to influence 1 towards the adjacent sideline.

From there, 1 begins dribbling down the court near the sideline, represented by the arrow with a wavy line while X1 mirrors that path, indicated by the gray arrow towards the half court line.

Additionally, as those actions transpire, X2 initially drops back to protect the middle area in the backcourt while X3 protects the middle in the frontcourt.

Moreover, as 5 cuts below the free throw line extended, X5 drops back to protect the basket.

Also, as 1 begins to dribble or pass into the frontcourt area, X2 slides toward the extended slot area in the frontcourt, mainly to be a hindrance if 1 attempts to pass the ball to the adjacent frontcourt wing area.

What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense that illustrates the first potential trap?

This is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense that illustrates the first potential trap that could occur once an offensive player dribbles into their team’s frontcourt, particularly near acoffin corner.

[Image Alt Text: An example of the first possible trap for the 1-1-2-1 press in the frontcourt near a coffin corner.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of the first possible trap for the 1-1-2-1 press in the frontcourt near a coffin corner.]

Essentially, if X1 successfully influences 1 into dribbling down the nearest sideline, then X4 could set a trap in the corner with X1 once 1 crosses the half court line.

What’s more, X2 could continue to hinder a possible passing option for 1 by playingdenial defenseagainst 3 near the wing area.

In other words, X2 could place a hand in the passing lane between 1 and 3, represented by the arrow, ultimately to increase the difficulty of 3 receiving an easy pass from 1.

In addition to that, X3, who is currently near the high post, could potentially intercept passes thrown to either 2 or 4 near the top or opposite wing respectively.

X5 continues to protect the basket, similar to the previous diagram.

It should be mentioned as well that for these examples, a defensive three-second rule is not in play, which allows X5 or other defenders to stay in the lane on an indefinite basis.

What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense when the ball gets passed out of the first trap?

This is an example of defensive actions within the 1-1-2-1 press that could happen after an offensive player successfully passes the ball out of the coffin corner near the half court line to the adjacent corner on the same side of the court.

[Image Alt Text: The defensive actions that could happen if the offensive player is able to pass out of the first potential trap towards the adjacent corner]

[Image Alt Text: The defensive actions that could happen if the offensive player is able to pass out of the first potential trap towards the adjacent corner]

Basically, 3 receives the ball from 1 in the corner. This would also be on the right side of the frontcourt from the offensive team’s point of view.

When that happens, X5 and X2 have to sprint tocloseouton the ball.

At the same time, X3 has to drop back into the lane to replace X5 as the current rim protector.

Furthermore, X4 has to replace the vacant spot left by X3 at the high post area and X1 can slide down slightly towards the ball. X1 does that to stand in the space between 1 and 3 for the time being.

What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense that demonstrates the second potential trap?

This is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense that demonstrates the second potential trap that could occur once the ball is in a corner near the baseline.

[Image Alt Text: An example of the 1-1-2-1 press that shows the second potential trap in the frontcourt corner near the baseline.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of the 1-1-2-1 press that shows the second potential trap in the frontcourt corner near the baseline.]

In essence, after 3 receives the ball from 1 as shown on the previous diagram, X2 and X5 can set a trap near the baseline corner.

Also, as that happens, X1 can implement denial defense by placing a hand in the passing lane between 1 and 3, represented by the arrow.

From there, if 3 were to attempt to pass the ball back to 1, then X1 could potentially deflect the ball or possibly intercept it, which could lead totransition offenseas well.

Moreover, X4 could potentially intercept passes that would be received by 2 or 4, represented by the arrows. Additionally, X3 continues to protect the basket.

What is an example of the 1-1-2-1 press defense when ball reversal happens in the backcourt?

This is an example of defensive actions within the 1-1-2-1 press that could occur when an offensive player in possession of the basketball reverses it via a backwards pass while still in their respective backcourt, prior to the first potential trap.

[Image Alt Text: An example within the 1-1-2-1 press that shows defensive actions that could occur if an offensive player with possession of the ball reverses it while still in their backcourt.]

[Image Alt Text: An example within the 1-1-2-1 press that shows defensive actions that could occur if an offensive player with possession of the ball reverses it while still in their backcourt.]

In essence, the player who performed the inbound pass, indicated as 4, steps onto the court from out of bounds and receives the ball from 1. This maneuver occurs before the defense is able to set the first potential trap.

Once that happens, X1 and X2 briefly wait to see if 4 will pass to another teammate or dribble down the court.

In this instance, 4 decides to pass the ball with 2 as the recipient. Therefore, X2 immediately begins to sprint towards 2 while also attempting to force 2 towards the adjacent sideline.

At the same time, X1 slides over to protect the middle area in the offensive team’s backcourt while X4 does the same but in the frontcourt.

X3 stays in position ready to set the first possible trap, this time on the opposite side of the court.

Meanwhile, X5 has dropped back into the lane, ready to protect the basket, mainly as a safety option against 5, who has moved below the free throw line extended area as well.

What’s more, if 3 runs across the court as a possible frontcourt passing option for 2, then X1 should continue down the middle area before eventually sliding towards thestrong sidewing area to deny an easy pass towards 3, denoted by the gray arrow.

In addition, X4 can continue to slide back towards the high post area, indicated by the gray arrow.

Affiliate Disclosure: I may earn a commission on qualifying purchases made through the links below.

Related:1-2-2 and 1-1-2-1 Three-Quarter Court Pressure Defense – Jay Wright
