Term: 1-4 high offense

--- Concise Definition ---
1-4 high offense : Basketball offensive strategy that primarily utilizes the high post as well as the wing areas to create scoring opportunities near the basket or from the perimeter, typically with a variety of basketball cuts and/or basketball screens.

--- Detailed Explanation ---
Table of Contents

- What is the 1-4 high offense in basketball?

- What is an example of 1-4 high offense featuring high post action?

- What is an example of 1-4 high offense featuring quick hitter action?

- What is an example of 1-4 high offense featuring UCLA action?

- What is an example of 1-4 high zone offense?

- What are general advantages of 1-4 high offense?

- What is a possible disadvantage of 1-4 high offense?

What is the 1-4 high offense in basketball?

The 1-4 high offense is a basketball strategy that primarily emphasizes creating scoring opportunities via the initial formation of one offensive player located at the top above the three-point line as well as four additional offensive players established alongside the wings and high post elbow areas.

How to understand the player roles and diagrams on this page

In reference to any diagrams below, each of the offensive and defensive players are generally represented by the standardbasketball positions, unless otherwise noted.

Additionally, offensive players are signified by numbers such as 1-5 while defensive players are indicated by the letter X, which is then followed by numbers such as X1-X5.

In essence, 1 and X1 indicate the respective offensive and defensivepoint guards. 2 and X2 signify the respective offensive and defensiveshooting guards.

3 and X3 denote the respective offensive and defensivesmall forwards. 4 and X4 designate the respective offensive and defensivepower forwards.

5 and X5 represent the respective offensive and defensivecenters.

Moreover, in terms of a brief legend for the diagrams:

- Black Dot or Small Circle:The black dot or small circle represents the basketball.

- Solid Arrow:The solid arrow indicates movement or a cut on the basketball court.

- Dotted Arrow:The dotted arrow represents a basketball pass.

- Wavy Arrow:The wavy arrow indicates dribbling.

- T-Shaped Symbol:The T-shaped symbol signifies a screen, also known as a pick.

- Double pipe symbol:The double pipe symbol denotes handoff action.

What is an example of 1-4 high offense featuring high post action?

A high post player could receive the ball during the initial action, which could lead to various scoring options.

The example diagrams below demonstrate this in more detail.

Part 1: High post handoff

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring handoff action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring handoff action.]

To start, 1 passes the ball towards the high post area, which is received by 4, and then 1 immediately follows that pass.

Afterwards, 1 could receive the ball again from 4 via a high post handoff. From there, 1 could dribble to the basket and attempt to score via a layup.

However, if 1 is not open to receive the ball, then 1 could simply continue the cut through to the left side low post area.

Part 2: Dribble handoff and stagger screen

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a dribble handoff and stagger screen after an initial high post pass.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a dribble handoff and stagger screen after an initial high post pass.]

Next, 4 executesdribble handoffaction with 2 who receives the ball and dribbles it toward the top.

Also, while that occurs, 1 cuts to the right side wing via a stagger screen set by 5 and 3.

Following that, 1 could receive the ball and take the three-point shot if that is available.

However, if the shot is not there, then 5 fills the left side low post area while 3 cuts out to the right side corner.

Part 3: Ram and side pick

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a ram screen and side pick action after an initial high post pass.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a ram screen and side pick action after an initial high post pass.]

Continuing on, 2 cuts down towards the low post area to set aram screenwith 5 as the recipient.

From there, 5 uses that screen to set a side pick, also referred to as a wing ball screen, with 1 as the recipient while 2 fills the left side corner.

1 dribbles toward the high post area while 5 rolls to the basket and 3 executesshake actionby lifting back up to the right side wing.

Following that, 1 could take the mid-range shot or pass the ball to one of the other teammates for additional scoring opportunities.

Related:1-4 Set High Post Offense

What is an example of 1-4 high offense featuring quick hitter action?

Offensive players can start the quick hitter action with a dribble weave. After that, it’s possible to include multipleoff-ball screens, which could lead to a three-point shot opportunity.

The example diagrams below illustrate this with more clarity.

Part 1: Dribble weave

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a dribble weave via quick hitter action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a dribble weave via quick hitter action.]

To begin, 1 performs dribble handoff action with 3 who gains possession of the ball and dribbles it back towards the top.

Following that, 3 executes dribble handoff action with 2 who receives the ball and dribbles it back towards the top as well.

Furthermore, while that weave action occurs, 4 and 5 cut down towards the left side and right side low post areas, respectively.

From this point, 2 has possession of the ball at the top while 1 and 3 fill the left side and right side wing areas, respectively.

It should be noted as well that the 1-4 high set effectively changed into a 3 out 2 in alignment.

Part 2: Triple screen

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a triple screen for a possible scoring opportunity via quick hitter action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a triple screen for a possible scoring opportunity via quick hitter action.]

Next, 1 cuts from the left side wing towards the right side wing by way of triple screens set by 4, 5, and 3.

Afterwards, 1 receives the ball from 2 and takes the three-point shot, assuming that is open.

What is an example of 1-4 high offense featuring UCLA action?

With theUCLA action, a player could cut to the basket via a back screen after a wing entry pass and potentially receive the ball again for a high percentage scoring opportunity.

It’s also possible to utilize screen the screener action via a flex screen and stagger screen for additional scoring options.

Part 1: UCLA

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring UCLA action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring UCLA action.]

To begin, 1 dribbles toward the left slot and then passes the ball, which is received by 3 on the left side wing.

After that, 1 performs the UCLA cut to the basket by way of aback screenset by 5.

If 1 is open, then 1 could receive the ball from 3 again and score via a layup.

Otherwise, 1 continues the cut through to the right side low post area while 2 flattens out to the right sidecornerarea.

Part 2: Flex and stagger

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a flex screen and stagger screen after UCLA action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high offense featuring a flex screen and stagger screen after UCLA action.]

Next, 2 cuts to the basket via aflex screenset by 1.

Also, while that cutting action happens, 1 comes back toward the top via astagger screenset by 4 and 5.

From there, 2 could receive the ball and score via a layup or 1 could receive it instead and take the three-point shot if that is open.

What is an example of 1-4 high zone offense?

Offensive players could utilize ball reversal, baseline cuts, and dive cuts against the2-3 zone, which could result in different scoring possibilities.

The example diagrams below demonstrate this in greater detail.

Part 1: Ball reversal and baseline cut

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high zone offense featuring ball reversal action and a baseline cut towards the short corner.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high zone offense featuring ball reversal action and a baseline cut towards the short corner.]

To begin, 3 receives the ball from 1, which should shift zone defenders towards that right side wing area. Following that, 3 could quickly reverse the ball back to 1.

Next, 3 could cut through the baseline behind the defenders towards the left side short corner area.

Afterwards, 2 receives the ball from 1 via another reversal. From there, 3 could receive the ball from 2 and potentially take the open jump shot around the short corner area.

Part 2: Dive cut

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high zone offense featuring a dive cut, which could lead to a high percentage scoring opportunity near the basket.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 high zone offense featuring a dive cut, which could lead to a high percentage scoring opportunity near the basket.]

Assuming 3 is not open to take the shot as shown on the diagram by way of X4 utilizing acloseout, then 5 can dive cut to the basket, receive the ball from 3 and score, particularly via a layup or dunk.

In essence, by moving the zone defenders, a gap is created. For this instance, that is between X3 and X5 so that 5 can cut through that space to receive the ball and possibly score.

What are general advantages of 1-4 high offense?

One particular advantage of the 1-4 high offense is that it influences thelow postplayers on defense away from the basket since the low post players on offense get positioned near the high post areas.

This could be very useful forundersized basketball teams, especially at the low post positions.

Furthermore, this could also result in potentially easier opportunities to scorefield goalsnear the rim by way of actions such asbackdoor cutsor high post back screens.

Another potential advantage of the 1-4 high offense is that it could be very effective for guard-oriented teams via offensive actions such as the pick and roll, the stagger screen, or the flex screen.

These types of offensive sequences could produce multiple scoring options near the basket or near the mid-range/three-point range areas for those same guard-oriented teams.

What is a possible disadvantage of 1-4 high offense?

One possible disadvantage of the 1-4 high offense is that it may not be as efficient for teams that prefer to play through the low post. As mentioned previously, the 1-4 high alignment naturally pulls offensive post players away from the basket.

So if those same post players offensive skill sets rely on playing with their backs to the basket, particularly via a series of low post moves, then the 1-4 high offense may not be the most suitable choice in that case.

Teams that prefer to run their offense through highly skilled back-to-the-basket low post players would probably be better served executing offenses such as the3 out 2 in motion offenseor thetriangle offenseas notable examples.
