Term: 1-4 press break

--- Concise Definition ---
1-4 press break : Basketball offensive strategy that can be implemented against press defenses such as the 1-2-1-1 diamond press, the 2-2-1 press, the 1-2-2 press or a full court man to man press.

--- Detailed Explanation ---
Table of Contents

- What is 1-4 press break offense in basketball?

- What is an example of 1-4 press break offense against 1-2-1-1 or 2-2-1 press?

- What is an example of 1-4 press break offense against full court man to man?

- What is an example of 1-4 press break offense that could create a numbers advantage?

- What is an example of 1-4 press break offense that could be ran during the last seconds?

What is 1-4 press break offense in basketball?

The 1-4 press break offense, also known as the 4-across press break, is a basketball strategy generally designed to create scoring opportunities near the basket or around perimeter areas of the court against various types of press defenses.

Potential benefit of 1-4 press break offense

The 1-4 press break offense could be beneficial to implement as it features two offensive players on each side of the floor. That, in turn, generally creates an overload condition.

Essentially, at least one of the opposing defenders within the press will most likely not be able to cover at least one of the offensive players efficiently and effectively.

When that occurs, at least one of the offensive players will more than likely be able to get open and receive the ball. This, at minimum, could relieve some of thedefensive pressure.

Furthermore, when a player gets open, that could increase the chances of the offensive teambreaking the press, especially if that opening occurs in the middle of it.

Afterwards, once a player is open and/or the press is broken, it would be possible for the offensive team to score points near the basket or aroundperimeterareas of the court.

How to understand the player roles and diagrams on this page

In reference to any diagrams below, each of the offensive players are generally represented by the standardbasketball positions, unless otherwise noted.

In essence, 1 is thepoint guard; 2 is theshooting guard; 3 is thesmall forward; 4 is thepower forward; 5 is thecenter.

Moreover, in terms of a brief legend for the diagrams:

- Black Dot or Small Circle:The black dot or small circle represents the basketball.

- Solid Arrow:The solid arrow indicates movement or a cut on the basketball court.

- Dotted Arrow:The dotted arrow represents a basketball pass.

- Wavy Arrow:The wavy arrow indicates dribbling.

- T-Shaped Symbol:The T-shaped symbol signifies a screen, also known as a pick.

- Double pipe symbol:The double pipe symbol denotes handoff action.

What is an example of 1-4 press break offense against 1-2-1-1 or 2-2-1 press?

This is an example of the 1-4 press break offense that could be useful against the1-2-1-1 pressor the2-2-1 press.

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 1-4 press break offense that could be utilized against a 1-2-1-1 or 2-2-1 press defense.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 1-4 press break offense that could be utilized against a 1-2-1-1 or 2-2-1 press defense.]

To begin, 4 receives the ball from the inbound player, who is 5. Next, 2 cuts to the ball side as the first option and could receive the basketball from 4.

If the first option is not available, then 1 cuts to the middle of the court as the second option.

At the same time, 3 sprints to the opposite sideline. From this point, if the offensive team executes quick passes into thefrontcourt, then a numbers advantage could occur against the press defense.

What is an example of 1-4 press break offense against full court man to man?

This is an example of 1-4 press break offense that could be used against a full courtman to man defense.

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 1-4 press break offense that could implemented against full court man to man defense.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 1-4 press break offense that could implemented against full court man to man defense.]

To start, 4 cuts towards the ball via a screen set by 5. Afterwards, 4 receives it from the inbounder, who is 1, while 5 cuts down the middle of the court.

As that happens, 3 cuts down the strong side wing into the frontcourt. Furthermore, 2 stays within thebackcourtfor the time being.

Next, 5 could receive the ball from 4 as the first option or 3 could receive it instead as the second option. If 5 receives it from 4, then 2 could cut down the weak side wing area, shown with the gray arrow.

Following that, 2 could receive the ball from 5 and dribble to score at the rim or take a jump shot if open. On the other hand, 3 could receive it from 5 and score at the rim or take a jump shot if open.

What is an example of 1-4 press break offense that could create a numbers advantage?

This is an example of 1-4 press break offense that could create a numbers advantage against the press defense.

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 1-4 press break offense that could potentially create a numbers advantage against the press defense.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 1-4 press break offense that could potentially create a numbers advantage against the press defense.]

To start, 4 cuts to the ball via a screen set by 5 and receives it from 2. As that happens, 3 begins cutting down the strong side wing.

Also, 5 begins to cut down the court on the weak side wing and at the same time, 1 cuts to the middle of the court. From that point, 1 could receive the ball from 4 as the first option.

If that occurs, then 1 could dribble towards the basket with 3 and 5 as passing options on the wings for a possible numbers advantage against the defense.

Conversely, if 1 is not open, then 3 could receive the ball from 4 as the second option. From there, 3 could dribble towards the basket, take an open jump shot, or utilize 1 or 5 as potential passing options.

What is an example of 1-4 press break offense that could be ran during the last seconds?

This is an example of 1-4 press break offense that could be ran during the last five to seven seconds of aperiodsuch as a quarter or possibly during the end of the game when the team needs to score at least two or three points to tie or win it.

It is based on25 Full-Court, Late-Clock Situation Playsby Austin McBeth.

This action could be most effective when the defense is executing a full court man-to-man defense and/or when the defensive pressure is very aggressive in the backcourt with no safety defender to strongly protect the basket within the offensive team’s frontcourt.

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 1-4 press break that could be ran during the last seconds of a period.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 1-4 press break that could be ran during the last seconds of a period.]

To begin, 2 should initially fake a cut towards the basket before sprinting back to the basketball. Additionally, as that occurs, 1 should cut towards the ball via screens set by 3 and 5.

Immediately after 1 cuts to the ball, 3 should quickly break out towards the basket and look to receive the ball via a long-distanceair passsuch as abaseball passexecuted by 4.

It should also be mentioned that 4 should time the pass so that the ball is already in the air as 1 is cutting towards the ball immediately after the second screen.

If the team needs two points, then 3 couldattack the rimand score via alayupor 3 could stop and pop for a mid-range jump shot.

Furthermore, if 5 possesses an above average amount ofspeed, then 5 could run to the rim, receive the ball from 3, and score via a layup or dunk.

Conversely, if the team needs three points, then 3 could stop and pop for a three-pointfield goalattempt.

Alternatively, 2 could sprint into the frontcourt near the wing, receive the ball via akick passfrom 3, and then take a three-point jump shot.
