Term: 1-4 low offense

--- Concise Definition ---
1-4 low offense : Strategy that begins with one player at the top above the three-point line and four additional players adjacent to the baseline, specifically near the low post and corner areas.

--- Detailed Explanation ---
Table of Contents

- What is the 1-4 low offense in basketball?

- What is an example of 1-4 low offense featuring hammer action?

- What is an example of 1-4 low offense featuring high low action?

- What is an example of 1-4 low offense featuring roll and replace action?

What is the 1-4 low offense in basketball?

The 1-4 low offense, sometimes referred to as 1-4 flat, is a basketball strategy that begins with one player at the top above the three-point line and four additional players adjacent to the baseline, specifically near the low post and corner areas.

How to understand the player roles and diagrams on this page

In relation to any diagrams below, each of the offensive players are generally represented by the standardbasketball positionsin number format, unless otherwise noted.

In essence, 1 is thepoint guard; 2 is theshooting guard; 3 is thesmall forward; 4 is thepower forward; 5 is thecenter.

Furthermore, in terms of a brief legend for the diagrams:

- Black Dot or Small Circle:The black dot or small circle represents the basketball.

- Solid Arrow:The solid arrow indicates movement or a cut on the basketball court.

- Dotted Arrow:The dotted arrow represents a basketball pass.

- Wavy Arrow:The wavy arrow indicates dribbling.

- T-Shaped Symbol:The T-shaped symbol signifies a screen, also known as a pick.

- Double pipe symbol:The double pipe symbol denotes handoff action.

What is an example of 1-4 low offense featuring hammer action?

Two players could cut over and under screens to the opposite wings. After that, it’s possible for players to execute the hammer action leading to a scoring opportunity.

Part 1: Wing cuts

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring wing cuts prior to hammer action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring wing cuts prior to hammer action.]

To start, 1 dribbles toward the left slot area and as that happens, 3 performs a baseline cut toward the left side wing area via the screens set by 4 and 5.

Furthermore, 2 cuts across the lane to the right side wing area. After that, 3 receives the ball from 1. From there, 3 could take the three-point shot if that is open while 1 cuts back toward the top.

Part 2: Hammer

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring hammer action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring hammer action.]

Next, 3 dribbles toward the baseline via thestep-up screenset by 4 and while that happens, 2 cuts to the right side corner via the hammer screen set by 4.

Following that, 2 could receive the ball from 3 via thedrift passand then take the open jump shot.

What is an example of 1-4 low offense featuring high low action?

A player could dribble towards a wing while another player cuts to replace at the top. Following that, a dribble handoff could occur leading to high low action.

The example diagrams below illustrate this in more detail.

Part 1: Dribble entry

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring a dribble entry prior to high low action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring a dribble entry prior to high low action.]

To begin, 1 could perform a dribble entry towards the left side wing area while 4 cuts to the top. Afterwards, 4 could receive the ball from 1.

Part 2: Dribble handoff and high low

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring a dribble handoff and high low action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring a dribble handoff and high low action.]

Next, 4 could initially dribble towards the right side corner while 2 sets up the defender before cutting towards 4. Following that, 2 could receive the ball from 4, completing the dribble handoff sequence, and then dribble towards the top.

As that happens, 5 could duck in and try to seal the defender under the basket. From there, 5 could receive the ball via the high low action and score via a layup or low post move.

However, if 5 is not open, then 5 could move back to the left side low post area.

Part 3: Screen pop and high low

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring screen pop action as well as another opportunity for and high low.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring screen pop action as well as another opportunity for and high low.]

Next, 4 could pick and pop to the high post area. 2 could use that pick and dribble towards the mid-post extended area inside of the three-point line, which could result in a possible mid-range shot.

Alternatively, 4 could receive the ball from 2 and when that occurs, 5 could duck in again looking for another high low opportunity.

Conversely, 4 could keep possession of the ball and either take the mid-range shot or drive to the basket.

What is an example of 1-4 low offense featuring roll and replace action?

A player could set a screen near the top and then roll to the basket. As that happens, another player could replace at the top, which could then lead to potential scoring opportunities.

Furthermore, it’s possible to implement a flex screen and flare screen for additional scoring options.

The example diagrams below illustrate these concepts in more detail.

Part 1: Roll and replace

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring roll and replace action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring roll and replace action.]

To start, 1 dribbles toward the right side wing by way of anon-ball screenset by 5.

Afterwards, 5 rolls to the basket and as that occurs, 4 replaces at the top near the left slot.

From that point, 5 could receive the ball from 1 and score via a layup or dunk. However, if 5 is not open, then 4 could receive the ball from 1.

Additionally, after that, 1 could fill the right side wing area and 5 could self-replace near the initial right side low post area.

Part 2: Flex

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring flex action after roll and replace.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring flex action after roll and replace.]

Next, 3 could cut to the via theflex screenset by 5, receive the ball from 4, and score at the basket.

Otherwise, 3 could continue the cut through the lane to the left side low post area if the opportunity to score is not open.

Part 3: Dribble handoff and flare

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring a dribble handoff and flare screen after roll and replace.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 1-4 low offense featuring a dribble handoff and flare screen after roll and replace.]

Following that, 4 could performdribble handoffaction alongside 2. Following that, 2 could dribble towards thehigh postarea.

Furthermore, 3 could cut out to fill and replace at the left side corner that was just previously occupied by 2.

Moreover, 4 could cut towards the basket at an angle and while that happens, 1 could cut to the right side corner, particularly via a flare screen set by 5.

Next, 4 could receive the ball from 2 and score near the basket. On the other hand, 1 could receive the ball instead and take a three-point shot if that is available.

Alternatively, 2 could simply keep possession of the ball and take a mid-range shot if that is open.
