Term: 2-3 zone defense

--- Concise Definition ---
2-3 zone defense : Basketball defensive strategy that seeks to limit dribble penetration, influence contested perimeter jump shots, and decrease offensive scoring opportunities, particularly from the low post areas, while executing adequate on-ball defense.

--- Detailed Explanation ---
Table of Contents

- What is the 2-3 zone defense in basketball?

- What are examples of 2-3 zone defense rotations?

- What is an example of a 2-3 zone defense drill?

- What are general advantages of 2-3 zone defense?

- What are general disadvantages of 2-3 zone defense?

- What are general principles of 2-3 zone defense?

What is the 2-3 zone defense in basketball?

The 2-3 zone defense is a basketball strategy that seeks reduce offensive scoring opportunities, especially from the low post areas, while also limiting dribble penetration and influencing perimeter shots.

How to understand the player roles and diagrams on this page

In reference to any diagrams below, each of the offensive and defensive players are generally represented by the standardbasketball positions, unless otherwise noted.

Additionally, offensive players are signified by numbers such as 1-5 while defensive players are indicated by the letter X, which is then followed by numbers such as X1-X5.

In essence, 1 and X1 indicate the respective offensive and defensivepoint guards. 2 and X2 signify the respective offensive and defensiveshooting guards.

3 and X3 denote the respective offensive and defensivesmall forwards. 4 and X4 designate the respective offensive and defensivepower forwards.

5 and X5 represent the respective offensive and defensivecenters.

Also, in terms of primary responsibilities for zone defenders: X1 and X2 cover the wing and high post areas; X3 and X4 cover the corners, the low post areas or wing areas in the event of ball reversal; X5 generally protects the basket and plays defense around the low post areas.

What’s more, in terms of a brief legend for the diagrams:

- Black Dot or Small Circle:The black dot or small circle represents the basketball.

- Solid Arrow:The solid arrow indicates movement or a cut on the basketball court.

- Dotted Arrow:The dotted arrow represents a basketball pass.

- Wavy Arrow:The wavy arrow indicates dribbling.

- T-Shaped Symbol:The T-shaped symbol signifies a screen, also known as a pick.

- Double pipe symbol:The double pipe symbol denotes handoff action.

What are examples of 2-3 zone defense rotations?

Defenders within the 2-3 zone can rotate to different areas of the court, mainly depending on the location of the ball.

When the ball is at the top

When an offensive player has possession of the ball at the top, two topside zone defenders could cover the high post elbow areas while three backside zone defenders guard near the low post areas and basket, respectively.

The diagram below demonstrates this concept.

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2-3 zone defense when the ball is at the top.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2-3 zone defense when the ball is at the top.]

X1 and X2 will cover the high post areas and deny any potential entry passes into the high post. At the same time, X3 and X4 will cover the low post areas while X5 stands in front of the basket.

When the ball is on the wing

When an offensive player has possession of the ball on the wing, a topside zone defender could rotate to cover the wing area. Furthermore, other zone defenders can move accordingly to cover the high post as well as near the corner and low post areas, respectively.

The diagram below illustrates this point in greater detail.

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2-3 zone defense when the ball is on the wing.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2-3 zone defense when the ball is on the wing.]

X1 slides over to cover 2 while X2 slides over to cover the high post and deny any potential entry passes.

At the same time, X3 stands in the gap between the low post and the corner. At the same time, X4 covers the weak side low post area. Additionally, X5 covers the low post player and could front to deny the low post entry pass.

When the ball is in the corner

When an offensive player has possession of the ball in the corner, a backside zone defender could cover the corner area. Other zone defenders could cover the wing, high post, and low post areas, respectively.

The diagram below showcases this concept with more clarity.

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2-3 zone defense when the ball is in the corner.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2-3 zone defense when the ball is in the corner.]

In essence, X3 executes a closeout to prevent an open jump shot or dribble penetration. Additionally, X1 covers the wing while X2 covers the high post. X4 continues to cover the weak side low post while X5 continues to guard the low post player.

When the ball is in the low post

When an offensive player has possession of the ball in the low post area, a topside and backside zone defender could execute a double team. Other zone defenders could perform various other rotations as well.

The diagrams below showcase this with more details.

Additionally, this particular example is based on insights fromNotre Dame’s 2-3 Zone Defensewith Muffet McGraw.

[Image Alt Text: Example 4 - Part 1]

[Image Alt Text: Example 4 - Part 1]

Essentially, if the ball gets into the low post, then certain zone defenders can execute double team action to influence a pass back towards the perimeter.

For the example itself, X5 plays behind and takes away the baseline near the low side. At the same time, X2 quickly drops back to help double team the ball near the high side. Also, X4 protects the basket from potential weak side cutting action by 1 or 3.

[Image Alt Text: Example 4 - Part 2]

[Image Alt Text: Example 4 - Part 2]

This part of the example demonstrates potential passing options that could occur out of the low post double team and how the zone defenders should rotate accordingly.

If 4 receives the ball from 5, then X3 should quickly closeout towards the ball and contest the jump shot if necessary. If 2 receives the ball from 5, then X1 should closeout and contest the jump shot if necessary.

Furthermore, if 1 receives the ball from either 5 (gray dotted arrow) or 2, then X2 should sprint to closeout with the possible contest if necessary.

Similarly, if 3 receives the ball from either 5 (gray dotted arrow skip pass) or 1, then X4 should step up to cover the left side wing area and after that, X2 should closeout towards the left side wing (gray solid arrow) and then bump X4 back to the left side low post area.

Additionally, if 3 flattened out to the left side corner (solid gray arrow) and received the skip pass from either 5, 2, or 1 (pass not shown on diagram), then X4 should closeout and contest if necessary (solid gray arrow).

What is an example of a 2-3 zone defense drill?

A 2-3 zone defense drill could feature four of the zone defenders near the high/low post areas with the objective is to improve the closeout technique near the wings and corners.

In terms of basic rules for the drills, the offensive team is first set up in a 5 out formation and these players can drive to the basket or shoot jump shots if open.

However, it should be noted that offensive actions should only happen after a certain number of passes occur or after a specific amount of time has passed.

What’s more, if the offensive team makes a field goal, then the offense wins the drill. Conversely, if the offensive team misses a field goal attempt, then the defense wins the drill.

After the winner has been determined, the players can switch sides: offense to defense and defense to offense.

Part 1: Top to wing pass

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 2-3 zone defense drill featuring a pass from the top to the wing.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 2-3 zone defense drill featuring a pass from the top to the wing.]

To start, 1 executes a pass from the top to the wing, which is received by 2. That influences X3 to temporarily guard 2. As that occurs, X1 sprints to the right side wing and bumps X3 to the back of the zone, shown with the gray arrows.

Also, X2 slides over towards the high post area while X4 slides over into the lane to protect the basket from potential weak side cutting action.

Part 2: Wing to corner pass

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 2-3 zone defense drill featuring a pass from the wing to the corner.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 2-3 zone defense drill featuring a pass from the wing to the corner.]

Next, 2 throws a pass from the wing to the corner, which is received by 5. That action triggers a closeout by X3 towards the right side corner. At the same time, X1 drops back to stand in the gap between the wing and corner in anticipation of a middle dribble drive or to closeout on 2.

Also, X2 continues to cover the high post while X4 continues to protect the basket.

Part 3: Corner to opposite wing pass

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 2-3 zone defense drill featuring a skip pass from the corner to the opposite wing.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of a 2-3 zone defense drill featuring a skip pass from the corner to the opposite wing.]

Following that, 5 throws a skip pass from the corner to the opposite wing with 3 as the recipient. When that occurs, X4 temporarily executes a closeout towards 3.

As that happens, X2 recovers to the left side wing and bumps X4 to the original area in the back of the zone. Also, X1 cuts to the high post area while X3 cuts into the lane to protect the basket.

What are general advantages of 2-3 zone defense?

One useful advantage of the 2-3 zone defense is that it could be possibly beneficial against offensive teams with less than average perimeter shooting skills.

Additionally, the 2-3 zone defense could also be somewhat advantageous against teams that prefer to generate points by passing the ball towards thelow postarea.

This is significant because if the offensive team passes the ball near the low post, then two of the zone defenders coulddouble teamthe low post player.

If that happens, then the low post player would most likely pass the ball to another teammate, preferably near one ofthe perimeterareas of the court.

Another notable advantage of the 2-3 zone defense is that it is versatile enough to provide adequate defensive coverage against the perimeter as well as the low post area.

In other words, there will typically be at least one defender that can quickly cover the wing, corner or low post area, even if the zone shifts from side to side by way of offensive ball movement.

What are general disadvantages of 2-3 zone defense?

The primary disadvantage and overall weakness of the 2-3 zone defense is that thehigh postarea is vulnerable due to the gap in the middle of the zone.

Therefore, if the offensive team successfully passes the ball into the high post area, then the zone would be effectively broken.

Once that occurs, the offensive team could quickly create scoring opportunities from the high post area, especially withhigh low actionor by passing the ball to potential perimeter shooters near the wings or corners.

So, to avoid this situation, it is absolutely necessary for the zone defenders, specifically at the front of the zone, to guard the high post with vigilance.

Other noteworthy disadvantages of the 2-3 zone are that it is susceptible to perimeterball reversalby the offensive team, particularly near the wings, and it is usually not very effective against offensive teams with multiple three-point shooters.

In other words, a team with multiple three-point shooters can simply reverse the ball along the perimeter and eventually wait for an opening to shoot three-pointers as the zone shifts from side to side.

What are general principles of 2-3 zone defense?

Limit or prevent low post touches

If the ball gets into the hands of a low post player with above average offensive skills, then that player could score quickly and efficiently against the nearest zone defender with a low post move.

Therefore, the strong side defenders near the back of the zone could alleviate this problem by standing in the gap between the low post area and the wing/corner.

This will increase the difficulty for the offensive team to make an easyentry passto the low post player.

Limit or prevent uncontested jump shots

One of the main purposes of the 2-3 zone, like most zone defenses, is to influence perimeter jump shots. However, this does not automatically mean that offensive players should be able to freely take uncontested jump shots.

Instead, the defenders of the 2-3 zone defense should always try tocloseoutwith good footwork and contest jump shots, even from below average shooters.

This is especially important for the defenders near the low post areas in the back of the zone. These defenders should emphasize executing good closeouts to prevent wide open jump shots.

Box out for defensive rebounds

Teams that run the 2-3 zone defense (and zone defense in general) do not guard specific players. Therefore, it is important for the zone defenders tobox outproperly when a player on the offensive team attempts afield goal.

This is particularly essential on long rebounds, which typically occur when the offensive team shoots a perimeter shot such as a three-pointer. Basically, missed perimeter jump shots will typically bounce long and away from the basket.

When that occurs, if the zone defenders do not box out properly (or at all), then the team on offense will have the opportunity to gain an offensive rebound and this in turn, could lead to second chance scoring opportunities.

Use bumping during ball reversal

As mentioned previously, one of the primary disadvantages of the 2-3 zone defense is its susceptibility to perimeter ball reversal. However, the zone defenders could mitigate this problem to a degree by executing a technique known as bumping.

Essentially, when the ball gets reversed from wing to wing, one of the zone defenders in the front, which typically covers the wing, will usually not have enough time to recover.

If that occurs, then this could lead to wide open perimeter jump shots or possible dribble penetration into the zone.

However, to counter that action by the offensive team, one of the zone defenders near the low post areas can step up towards the wing to cover that area for about a second or two until the respective zone defender in the front can recover and bump that back side defender to their original zone area.

Affiliate Disclosure: I may earn a commission on qualifying purchases made through the links below.

Related:Creating a Dominant 2-3 Zone Defense – Alan Marshall
