Term: 2-3 zone offense

--- Concise Definition ---
2-3 zone offense : Plays, strategies, and actions that are designed to create scoring opportunities against the 2-3 zone defense.

--- Detailed Explanation ---
Table of Contents

- What is the 2-3 zone offense in basketball?

- What is an example of 2-3 zone offense featuring a 1-4 high set?

- What is an example of 2-3 zone offense with a baseline runner?

- What is an example of 2-3 zone offense featuring a 3 out 2 in set?

- What is a general overview of 2-3 zone offense principles?

What is the 2-3 zone offense in basketball?

The 2-3 zone offense utilizes strategies and tactics that are designed to create scoring opportunities near the basket or around perimeter areas of the court against the2-3 zone defense.

How to understand the player roles and diagrams on this page

In reference to any diagrams below, each of the offensive or defensive players are generally represented by the standard basketball positions, unless otherwise noted.

In essence, 1 and X1 indicate the respective offensive and defensivepoint guards.

2 and X2 signify the respective offensive and defensiveshooting guards.

3 and X3 denote the respective offensive and defensivesmall forwards.

4 and X4 designate the respective offensive and defensivepower forwards.

5 and X5 represent the respective offensive and defensivecenters.

Moreover, in terms of a brief legend for the diagrams:

- Black Dot or Small Circle:The black dot or small circle represents the basketball.

- Solid Arrow:The solid arrow indicates movement or a cut on the basketball court.

- Dotted Arrow:The dotted arrow represents a basketball pass.

- Wavy Arrow:The wavy arrow indicates dribbling.

- T-Shaped Symbol:The T-shaped symbol signifies a screen, also known as a pick.

- Double pipe symbol:The double pipe symbol denotes handoff action.

What is an example of 2-3 zone offense featuring a 1-4 high set?

This is an example of 2-3 zone offense featuring a1-4 high setthat utilizesball reversal, a short corner pass, as well as off-ball screening actions to create scoring opportunities.

Part 1: Ball reversal and through cut

[Image Alt Text: Ball reversal and a through cut within part 1 of a 2-3 zone offense initiated from a 1-4 high set.]

[Image Alt Text: Ball reversal and a through cut within part 1 of a 2-3 zone offense initiated from a 1-4 high set.]

To begin, 3 receives the ball from 1, which influences the zone defenders to move from their original locations.

Immediately afterwards, 1 receives the ball again and quickly swings it to the other side with 2 as the recipient. This most likely will influence the zone defenders to shift in that direction as well.

Moreover, as that ball reversal occurs, 3 cuts through to the right side short corner area that is between the deep corner behind the three-point line and the right sidelow postarea, generally behind the zone defenders, especially X3.

Once in place at the short corner, 3 could receive the ball from 2, preferably by way of abounce passthat is thrown at an angle. From there, 3 could take the mid-range jump shot if that is feasible.

It should be mentioned in regards to the ball reversal that if 2 just happens to be open because X3 doesn’t slide upwards to contest and/or because X1 is not able tocloseoutquickly enough, then 2 could always take the three-point jump shot if that is open.

Part 2: Cross screens and dive cut

[Image Alt Text: Cross screen and dive cut action within part 2 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

[Image Alt Text: Cross screen and dive cut action within part 2 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

Continuing on, 2 could cut down into the lane to set across screenon X4. Furthermore, around that same time, 4 can set a cross screen on X5.

Additionally, while those screening actions occur, 5 dive cuts into the open gap behind 4, receives the ball from 3, and scores by way of alayup.

Alternatively, if X1 and/or X3 are paying too much attention to the screening actions while 3 still retains possession of the ball, then that may give 1 an opportunity to cut behind them, receive the ball from 3 and take the three-point shot.

What is an example of 2-3 zone offense with a baseline runner?

This is an example of 2-3 zone offense with a baseline runner that also includes adribble entryand ball reversal, ultimately to create one or more scoring opportunities against the 2-3 zone defense.

[Image Alt Text: Dribble entry, ball reversal, and baseline runner action within a 2-3 zone offense.]

[Image Alt Text: Dribble entry, ball reversal, and baseline runner action within a 2-3 zone offense.]

To begin, 1 carries out a dribble entry towards the empty left side wing. As that happens, the zone defenders, particularly X1 and X2 will most likely shift to track the ball and protect thenailarea.

Additionally, while 1 is dribbling, 3 begins cutting across the lane to the empty right side wing area. Next, 1 throws askip passfrom the left side wing to the right side slot area with 4 as the receiver.

Also, as that skip pass occurs, 2 begins to run thebaselinetowards the other side of the court, especially behind the zone defenders while 5 sets a cross screen on X5.

From there, 3 quickly receives the ball from 4. At that point, X1 will probably not have enough time to closeout to the ball. As a result, 3 might have an open three-point shot opportunity.

However, it is probable that X3 will lift up towards the wing temporarily so that 3 will not be fully unguarded; that is, at least until X1 is able to bump X3 back down towards their original zone area.

In the event that X3 lifts up, this generally means that 2 will be left unguarded at that time.

From there, 2 could receive the ball from 3 and take a mid-range or three-point shot depending on whichever location 2 decided to fill.

Alternatively, if 2 decides to fill the short corner, 5 might be able to turn and seal X5 behind them, receive the ball from 2, and score a layup in the basket.

Best Zone Offense Versus 2-3 Zone – YouTube

What is an example of 2-3 zone offense featuring a 3 out 2 in set?

This is an example of 2-3 zone offense featuring a3 out 2 inset that begins with three perimeter players as well as two low post players, ultimately to attack a 2-3 zone defense.

Moreover, this particular scheme emphasizes getting the ball to the wings and/or short corners for potential scoring opportunities. In addition, it includes acontinuity patternto run the action on the opposite side of the floor as well.

Part 1: Top, wing, and short corner pass action

[Image Alt Text: Top, wing, and short corner passing action within part 1 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

[Image Alt Text: Top, wing, and short corner passing action within part 1 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

To start, 3 receives the ball from 1. After that, the zone defenders will most likely shift towards the ball. This leads to 4 cutting to the short corner via the screen set by 5.

From there, 4 receives the ball from 3, which could result in a short corner shot if that is open. Alternatively, 5 could pivot, seal the nearest zone defender behind them, receive the ball from 4, and score around the rim via a layup.

Otherwise, if the pivot and seal action is not there and as a result, 4 keeps possession of the ball, then 5 can simply cut across to fill the vacant left side low post area.

Part 2: Wing cut

[Image Alt Text: Wing cut action, which could lead to a layup, within part 2 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

[Image Alt Text: Wing cut action, which could lead to a layup, within part 2 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

Next, 3 cuts to the basket from the right side wing between the gaps of the zone defenders. 3 can receive the ball from 4 if that is open and score via a layup at the rim.

On the other hand, 4 dribbles up to the right side wing while 3 replaces at the right side short corner.

Part 3: Ball reversal and continuity initiation

[Image Alt Text: Ball reversal and continuity pattern initiation within part 3 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

[Image Alt Text: Ball reversal and continuity pattern initiation within part 3 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

At this point, it’s possible to start the continuity pattern; albeit slightly different from the initial diagram in the set.

Continuing on, ball reversal occurs with 1 receiving the ball from 4 and then 2 receiving it thereafter.

Following that action, the zone defenders will most likely shift again towards the ball. As that happens, 3 runs the baseline to the left side short corner via the screen set by 5.

Next, 3 could receive the ball from 2 and take the short corner shot if that is open. Alternatively, 5 can pivot and seal the nearest zone defender, receive the ball from 3, and score at the basket via a layup.

Otherwise, if 3 retains possession of the ball because 5 is not open on the pivot and seal, then 5 simply cuts back across to the right side low post area.

Part 4: Wing cut continuity

[Image Alt Text: Wing cut continuity pattern within part 4 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

[Image Alt Text: Wing cut continuity pattern within part 4 of a 2-3 zone offense.]

Next, 2 cuts to the basket from the left side wing between the zone defenders and could receive the ball from 3 if that is open, which could lead to a layup.

Otherwise, 3 dribbles up towards the left side wing while 2 replaces at the left side short corner.

The continuity could then be ran again utilizing the ball reversal and the wing to short corner pass among the other offensive actions.

What is a general overview of 2-3 zone offense principles?

Space the floor

Goodbasketball spacinghelps the offense move the ball more efficiently. This, in turn, could cause the zone to shift, which could lead to potential defensive breakdowns.

Additionally, good spacing and ball movement could produce higher quality scoring opportunities, particularly via jump shots, against the 2-3 zone defense.

Screen the zone

Each defender covers a specific area within the 2-3 zone defense. Therefore, settingscreenson those defenders could create gaps within the zone.

That, in turn, could create separation for offensive players to score points, particularly from three-point range or even near the basket.

Attack the gaps

Generally speaking, offensive players should consider attacking the gaps of the 2-3 zone whenever possible.

This can be accomplished withdribble penetrationor by way of certainbasketball cutssuch as the flash cut.

Reverse the ball

Ball reversal could be implemented within 2-3 zone offense, specifically by passing the basketball from one side of the court to the other, especially around the perimeter areas.

Reversing the ball generally influences the zone defenders to shift from one area to another, mainly to track the ball and stay in front of any particular offensive player who would have possession of it.

As a result of that action, gaps will most likely form either in the middle of the zone or near certain areas on the weak side such as the wing or corner.

From there, offensive players could take advantage of that in certain instances, such as via a skip pass that is thrown from one side of the court to the other before the defense can fully react.

Overload the zone

An overload occurs when there are more offensive players on one side of the court than there are defenders on that same side.

A common overload within 2-3 zone offense is to have a player on the wing, one in the corner, and another near the low post.

When that occurs, there will usually only be two zone defenders on that same side and in essence, one of those defenders would have the challenging task of trying to cover two offensive players.

As a result, one of the three offensive players would more than likely be able to get open and receive the ball, which could lead to potential scoring opportunities.

Get the ball into the short corners

In general, there are gaps or open spaces in the short corners of the 2-3 zone defense.

So, if the offensive team is able to get the ball into those short corners, then the defense could become vulnerable to breakdowns.

In reference to the 2-3 zone in particular, if the ball goes into the short corner, then as a typical result, the defender near that area would have to guard1 on 1or give up a potential short corner jump shot.

Also, the offensive team could potentially send a secondary off-ball cutter straight to the basket, looking to receive the ball from the player in the short corner. That could lead to a feasible scoring opportunity as well.

Get behind the zone

Offensive teams should try to get behind the zone defenders whenever possible. This will help those players exploit the vulnerabilities of the zone because the defenders cannot efficiently guard what they cannot see.

One of the ways to get behind the 2-3 zone is to use the short corner as mentioned previously. Additionally, players could also run the baseline from one side to the other side, being sure to cut behind the zone defenders as well.

Affiliate Disclosure: I may earn a commission on qualifying purchases made through the links below.

Related:Running & Defeating the 2-3 Zone Defense – Jim Boeheim & Dave Odom
