Term: 2 out 3 in motion offense

--- Concise Definition ---
2 out 3 in motion offense : Basketball offensive strategy that emphasizes ball movement, post split action, and continuity patterns to create scoring opportunities near the basket or from the perimeter.

--- Detailed Explanation ---
Table of Contents

- What is the 2 out 3 in motion offense in basketball?

- What is an example of 2 out 3 in motion featuring continuity action?

- What is an example of 2 out 3 in motion offense featuring a continuity variation?

What is the 2 out 3 in motion offense in basketball?

The 2 out 3 in motion offense is a basketball strategy that generally utilizes various cutting and screening actions, ultimately to create one or more scoring opportunities near the basket or around perimeter areas of the court.

The 2 out 3 in motion offense also features two players outside and above the free throw line extended area. Furthermore, three additional players are located inside and below the free throw line extended area.

How to comprehend the player roles and diagrams on this page

In reference to any diagrams below, each of the offensive players are generally represented by the standardbasketball positionsin number format, unless otherwise noted.

Essentially, 1 is thepoint guard; 2 is theshooting guard; 3 is thesmall forward; 4 is thepower forward; 5 is thecenter.

Furthermore, in terms of a brief legend for the diagrams:

- Black Dot or Small Circle:The black dot or small circle represents the basketball.

- Solid Arrow:The solid arrow indicates movement or a cut on the basketball court.

- Dotted Arrow:The dotted arrow represents a basketball pass.

- Wavy Arrow:The wavy arrow indicates dribbling.

- T-Shaped Symbol:The T-shaped symbol signifies a screen, also known as a pick.

- Double pipe symbol:The double pipe symbol denotes handoff action.

What is an example of 2 out 3 in motion featuring continuity action?

2 out 3 in motion offense could feature acontinuitypattern that includesbaseline runneraction, across screen, and asplit cut, which could lead to scoring possibilities.

The example diagrams below demonstrate this in more detail.

Additionally, the diagrams are inspired by actions withinHow to Run the 2-Out 3-In Motion Offenseby Steve Alford.

Part 1: Baseline run

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features baseline runner action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features baseline runner action.]

To start, 2 receives the ball from 1 and as that happens, 3 runs the baseline from the right to left corners via the screens set by 4 and 5.

At the same time, 2 could dribble towards the extended left slot, indicated by the wavy arrow, which could help improve the passing angle.

Afterwards, 3 could receive the ball from 2, indicated by the dotted arrow. Following that, 3 could take the three-point shot if that is open while 2 moves back to the standard left slot.

Part 2: Cross screen and exchange

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that showcases cross screen and exchange action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that showcases cross screen and exchange action.]

Next, if 3 is not open to take the shot, then 3 could begin dribbling the ball back towards the left side wing area.

As that happens, 5 could cut through the lane to the left low post area via a cross screen set by 4.

Following that, 5 could receive the ball from 3 and potentially try to score points via a low post move.

Also, after setting the screen, 4 could continue through towards the right side corner and eventually towards the right side wing area on theweak side.

Furthermore, 1 and 2 can exchange slot areas on the court to occupy their respective defenders.

Part 3: Split cut

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that showcases split cut action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that showcases split cut action.]

Next, while 5 has possession of the ball, 1 could cut to the left side wing area via theaway screenset by 3.

Afterwards, 1 could possibly receive the ball from 5 and take the open three-point shot.

Additionally, since 3 passed the ball into the post area and cut away from the ball, in this instance to set a screen, that is generally referred to as asplit cut.

What’s more, 3 could alsoslip the screentowards the basket, receive the ball from 5, and score via a layup at the rim.

However, if 3 doesn’t receive the ball, then 3 simply fills the empty right side low post area while 2 and 4 fill the left and right slot areas, respectively.

It should also be noted that the exchange and split cut can occur around the same timing, although this is not fully displayed via the diagrams.

In other words, after 3 passes the ball into the post area and the exchange happens within the slots, 3 doesn’t have to wait to see if 5 is going to attempt a field goal for scoring purposes near the low post area.

Instead, 3 could immediately execute the split cut action as 1 and 2 are exchanging slot areas.

Essentially, the diagrams are shown a certain way; in this instance, to keep the various offensive actions as clear as possible.

Part 4: Baseline run continuity

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features the continuity pattern of the baseline runner action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features the continuity pattern of the baseline runner action.]

At this point, it is feasible to run the offense as a continuity pattern on the other side of the court.

In essence, 2 receives the ball from 1 who then moves to the adjacent left side corner.

Next, 4 receives the ball from 2 and could dribble towards the extended right slot. As that happens, 1 could run the baseline to the right side corner via the screens set by 3 and 5.

From there, 1 could receive the ball from 4 and take the open three-point shot while 4 moves back to the right slot area.

Part 5: Cross screen and exchange continuity

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that showcases the continuity pattern of the cross screen and exchange action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that showcases the continuity pattern of the cross screen and exchange action.]

Continuing on, 1 can dribble up towards the right side wing while 5 cuts through the lane via the cross screen set by 3

Afterwards, 5 could receive the ball from 1 and possibly score points via a low post move.

In addition, following the screening action, 3 could continue through towards the left side corner and wing area.

Moreover, 2 and 4 can exchange slot areas on the court to occupy their respective defenders.

Part 6: Split cut continuity

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that showcases split cut continuity action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example of 2 out 3 in motion offense that showcases split cut continuity action.]

Next, while 5 still has possession of the ball, 2 could cut to the right side wing area via the away screen set by 1.

From that point, 2 could possibly receive the ball from 5 and take the open three-point shot.

Additionally, 1 could also slip the screen after the split cut action, receive the ball from 5, and score via a layup at the rim.

However, if 1 is not open, then 1 fills the left side low post area while 4 and 3 fill the right and left slot areas, respectively.

Once more, the continuity could keep going with 4 receiving the ball from 2 followed by the eventual baseline cut to the opposite corner by 2 and so on.

What is an example of 2 out 3 in motion offense featuring a continuity variation?

A continuity variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense could emphasize perimeter-based scoring opportunities and could also be potentially beneficial if each of the players have three-point shooting capability.

What’s more, it’s possible to implement a slip screen option, which could lead to a high percentage shot around the basket.

The example diagrams below illustrate this with more clarity.

Part 1: Baseline run

[Image Alt Text: An example variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features baseline runner action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features baseline runner action.]

This beginning action is somewhat similar to the previous example. In essence, 3 receives the ball from 1 and as that occurs, 2 runs the baseline from the right to left corner areas via the screens set by 4 and 5.

At the same time, 3 could dribble towards the extended left slot. Afterwards, 2 could receive the ball from 3, which could result in a three-point shot opportunity if that is open.

What’s more, 3 moves back to the adjacent slot while 4 fills the vacant right side corner after setting the screen earlier.

Part 2: Stagger and slip

[Image Alt Text: An example variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features a stagger screen and slip action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features a stagger screen and slip action.]

If the three-point shot is not available, then 2 could dribble up towards the left side wing.

As that occurs, 5 replaces at the left side corner while 4 cuts to the top via thestagger screenset by 1 and 3.

From there, 4 could receive the ball from 2 and take the three-point shot if that is open.

Alternatively though, 3 could slip to the basket and receive the ball instead, leading to a possible layup near the rim.

On the other hand, if 4 receives the ball but the shot is not there, then 3 and 1 could fill the left side and right low post areas, respectively.

Part 3: Baseline run continuity

[Image Alt Text: An example variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features a continuity pattern for baseline runner action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features a continuity pattern for baseline runner action.]

Assuming none of the players were able to get open via the screens or slip action, the offense can be executed on the other side as a continuity pattern.

Basically, 4 could dribble towards the extended right slot and as that occurs, 5 runs the baseline from the left to left corner areas via the screens set by 2 and 1.

Afterwards, 5 could receive the ball from 4, which could lead to a potential open three-point shot opportunity.

Additionally, 4 moves back to the right slot area while 3 occupies the vacant left slot and 2 fills the left side corner after setting the screen earlier.

Part 4: Stagger and slip continuity

[Image Alt Text: An example variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features the continuity pattern of a stagger screen and slip action.]

[Image Alt Text: An example variation of 2 out 3 in motion offense that features the continuity pattern of a stagger screen and slip action.]

Continuing, if the three-point shot is not there, then 5 could dribble up towards the right side wing area.

At the same time, 1 replaces at the right side corner while 2 cuts to the top by way of the stagger screen set by 3 and 4.

From there, 2 could receive the ball from 5 and take the three-point shot if that is open.

4 could also slip to the basket and receive the ball instead as an alternative option, which could result in a layup or dunk.

Conversely, if 2 does receive the ball but the shot is not available, then 4 and 3 could fill the right and left side low post areas, respectively.

Assuming the offensive team doesn’t have to worry about ashot clock, the continuity pattern could be performed indefinitely until a feasible shot and subsequent scoring opportunity is made available.

Affiliate Disclosure: I may earn a commission on qualifying purchases made through the links below.

Related:How to Run the 2-Out 3-In Motion Offense – Steve Alford
